In this lecture, you'll learn about standard, extended and named ACLs. And we're going to start looking
deeper into the syntax of our access control list. So you saw the slide in the last lecture.
That's the format of the command, when we're building our ACLs. At global config, we start with access-list
and then we have a number for the access-list.
The different numbers, if it's numbered from 1 to 99,
it's an IP standard access-list.
If it's from 100 to 199, then it's an extended list. And we'll get to
the extended in a second. So the original implementation was standard and extended numbered ACLs. Standard
ACLs reference the source address only.
So that's all the router is caring about when it processes the ACL is the source address. It is not looking at
the destination address the protocol, the port number, anything like that.
Extended ACLs are more granular, however.
They don't just check the source address.
They can also check
the protocol like TCP or UDP, the destination address and the port number.
So you just saw
on the last slide the ranges for these are if it's numbered from 1 to 99, it's always a standard ACL.
If you number it from 1 to 99, you can't put information in there like the destination IP address.
If it's numbered from 100 to 199, it's always an extended ACL, which does allow you to put
even more granular information.
Now, Cisco improved this later on.
So that was the original implementation, which standard was from 1 to 99, extended was from 100 to
199.
Now, it's not likely, but it is possible in very large environments like service providers.
And if they've got lots of sub interfaces that they could run out of ACL numbers.
So normal enterprises wouldn't happen, but it is feasible.
So because of this, Cisco expanded the range. And standard is now not just 1 to 99.
They also included 1300 to 1999 as well.
So you can use any of those numbers for a standard ACL.
The extended ACL numbers were also expanded as well.
It doesn't just include 100 to 199, it also includes 2000 to 2699 as well now.
So here's an example of a standard ACL.
We've got access-list 1 deny 10.10.10.10 0.0.0.0.
So the wildcard mask here would mean that we're just looking for the particular host,
10.10.10.10.
And then the second line is access-list 1 permit
10.10.10.0 0.0.0.255
So what this ACL is doing is it's denying the one particular host, 10.10.10.10.
It's permitting everything else on the 10.10.10.0/24 network.
The default wildcard mask for a standard ACL is 0.0.0.0. So this is a wildcard. So that would
equate to a subnet mask of 255.255.255.255, meaning it's an individual host address.
So if we look back, we said the first line access-list 1 deny 10.10.10.10 0.0.0.0
because
0.0.0.0
is the default,
we could have just said access-list 1 deny 10.10.10.10
means the same thing.
Don't forget to enter the wildcard
when you're specifying an IP subnet though, not just an individual host.
The command line will allow you to enter the command.
For example, access-list 1 deny 10.10.10.0
with no wildcard mask, but this obviously would not match anything
then and it would be an error. So for when you are specifying a subnet, I'll go back a slide again.
The second line was access-list 1 permit 10.10.10.0 0.0.0.255.
Remember to put the wildcard mask in when you're specifying a subnet or it's going to default to /32
and it's not going to work.
OK, so that was a standard ACL we were just looking at the source address. With an extended ACL,
we can have much more granular information in there.
So an example of an extended ACL, again at global config,
We'd say access-list 100 deny tcp from 10.10.10.10,
wildcard mask
0.0.0.0.
So we're looking for the host where the source port number is greater than 49151
going to a destination address of 10.10.50.10 with a wildcard mask of 0.0.0.0.
So looking for the host again and equals a destination
port number of 23. Telnet, which you'll also learn about later, uses 23 as its destination port.
So this would be denying telnet traffic from the host 10.10.10.10 going to the host
10.10.50.10.
Then the next line access-list 100 permit tcp 10.10.10.0 with a wildcard mask of 0.0.0.255,
source port is greater than 49151, going to a destination host of
10.10.50.10 equals telnet.
So this is a very similar example to the standard ACL that we had before.
But the standard ACL was just saying block all traffic from 10.10.10.10 and allow
everything from the 10.10.10.0/24 subnet. Here,
we're getting more granular.
We're seeing it's not just all traffic coming from there.
It's telnet traffic, which is going to a particular host.
OK, so those were examples of standard and extended ACLs.
The extended ACL does not have a default wildcard masks. So with the standard ACL,
the default wildcard mask is a /32 0.0.0.0. The extended does not have a default.
So if you put in an extended ACL and you don't specify the wildcard mask, it will give you an error message.
So you can see that's what I did here.
I said access-list 150 deny tcp 10.10.10.10,
and then I went straight to the source port without specifying the wildcard mask.
If you do that, the command line will throw back and error saying that there's invalid input. It shows
you where.
It's because I didn't enter the wildcard.
OK, so that was standard and extended ACLs. The last type of
ACL we have was another improvement.
So originally we had standard ACLs, then we had extended ACLs. Then standard and extended, the
ranges were expanded and then after that, Named ACLs came out.
So you can now reference ACL either by a number or by a name. Named ACLs
begin with the command ip access-list at global config instead of access-list, which is for numbered
ACLs.
So if we go to global config, we say ip access-list and then a question mark, to check syntax. The
next
command, we say whether this is going to be an extended or a standard ACL.
The syntax for Named ACL is very similar, but slightly different with numbered ACLs.
So let me show you the numbered ACL again. With a numbered ACL,
it always starts with access-list and then the number and then it's going to be a denied entry or a permit
entry. With named ACL, the syntaxes are a little bit neatier and tidier.
So it starts with ip access-list,
then you say whether it's standard or extended, and then you give a name here.
I've named it Flackbox-Demo, then you say your entries.
So I've denied 10.10.10.10 0.0.0.0.
I've permitted 10.10.10.0 0.0.0.255.
So when you use a named ACL, when you put the first line in, when you create the named ACL, it then
goes into a submenu where you configure the rules in that ACL.
When you do a numbered ACL, it's different and that you always do it at global config and you have to say access-list
then the number at the start every time.
So very similar configuration, named ACL.
It's been your way of doing it.
It's what's more commonly used now.
It's a little bit tidier configuration.
OK, so that was our standard, our extended, our named ACLs.
One other thing I want to tell you, I nearly forgot, is about that source port number. Because you
maybe wondering about that.
So here's our extended access-list example.
And you can see in our source port, I've specified is greater than 49151..
The reason I've used this is that with modern versions of Windows, from Windows 7 and later, it uses
a random source port number whenever it's sending traffic out.
But it begins with the number 49152.
It can be 49152 or higher, but not up to a certain number in the range.
It used to be greater than 1024 with older versions of Windows like XP, but it's a bit of a higher
number now.
So I just thought I'd mention that in case you were wondering where that source port number came from.
With the ACL, it's not so common to care about source port number because that can change.
But the destination port number will be fixed based on the application.
OK, that's everything I needed to tell you in this lecture.
See you in the next one where we'll start going through the rest of the syntax.